Changelog for v0.1.5 (#99)
Mapotempo/optimizer-api: CHANGELOG.md

# Changelog

## [Unreleased]

## [v0.1.5] - 2021-01-05

### Added

- Allow support for semicolumn and tabulation in CSV files

> - Allow initial routes when partitions are required (Especially for Scheduling problems). Note that, this feature is available for preprocessing/partitions but is under development for split based algorithms (`split_solve` and `dichotomous`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Initial routes are now taken into account when using partitions. However, respecting initial routes within split based algorithm (`split_solve` and `dichotomous`) is still under development.
```

- `position` field for activities
- Unfeasible missions are removed from routes [#31](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/31)
- Detailed route costs both for routes and solutions [#46](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/46)

> - [WIP] Allow multidepot within clustering, it currently only influence initialization of clusters [#56](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/56)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [WIP] Allow multidepot within clustering. For now this only influences clusters initialization [#56](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/56)
```

> - Introduce direct shipments, pickup and delivery must be consecutive [#51](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/51)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduce direct shipments : pickup and delivery must be consecutive [#51](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/51)
```

- Return original ids for missions and vehicles [#73](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/73)
- Return `total_waiting_time` [#83](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/83)
- Introduce `minimize_days_worked` parameter for scheduling heuristic. The default behavior of scheduling heuristic is now to balance work load over the period, the introduced parameter allows to return to the previous behavior [#89](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/89)

> - Detect unconsistent `same_point_day` definition [#76](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/76)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Detect inconsistent `same_point_day` definition [#76](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/76)
```

### Changed

- Cache is now part of wrappers hash
- Collect current distance from OR-Tools
- Refactoring of the chaining of the various solving procedures (Rework `define_process`)
- Now use OR-Tools asserts instead or recompiling the entire project
- Reject too small lapses
- Bump OR-Tools to v7.8
- Various edits, improvements and refactoring within scheduling heuristic

> - Sheduling heuristic now empty underfilled routes to reaffect [#28](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/28)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Scheduling heuristic now empties under-filled routes to reassign them [#28](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/28)
```

- Improve unfeasible service detection performance [#28](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/28) [#65](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/65)

> - Avoid heuristic selection when unncessary [#31](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/31)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Avoid heuristic selection when unnecessary [#31](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/31)
```

- Vehicle sort by day index [#31](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/31)
- `overall_duration` parameter from API as it is not functional [#46](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/46)

### Fixed

- Resolution time when using split_independent or max_split procedures
- Alternative activities with empties and fills
- Shift computation for sheduling problems
- Sheduling heuristic now rejects shipments and rests [#28](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/28)
- Reject empty problems [#35](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/35)
- Negative time limits [#35](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/35)
- Expand multi_trips only once [#36](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/36)
- Remove data from already started jobs [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)
- Clean interrupted working jobs at startup [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)
- Error when delete operation is invoked immedialty after get [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)
- Coerce `first_solution_strategy` into array [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)

> - Avoid unecessary route generation [#46](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/46)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Avoid unnecessary route generation [#46](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/46)
```

> - Correctly handle consecutive delete operations [#52](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/52)

Reviewer 2: I think this problem didn't existed in the previous release, it was a bug introduced and fixed within this release.

Author: I would prefer to keep this particular point, as it was not the first we met such issue event if it was hidden in previous releases

- Returned http error codes [#62](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/62)

> - Split by skills was generating unexpected sub-problems [#47](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/47)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Split by skills generating unexpected sub-problems [#47](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/47)
```

- Remove duplicated empty routes for the same vehicle [#50](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/50)
- Return `total_time` and `total_travel_distance` from scheduling heuristic [#63](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/63)
- Infinite loop due to impossible split within `dichotomous` [#67](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/67)
- Avoid depot duplication [#72](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/72)
- Wrong number of visits [#86](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/86)

> - Protobuf needs binarymode [#87](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/87)
> - Rewind protobuf output before decode [#87](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/87)
> - Parse the last solution provided by optimizer-ortools only once [#87](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/87)

Reviewer 2: Can't we group these 3 as follows? The details of PR87 are not that interesting
```suggestion
- Parsing of intermediate protobuf file returned by optimizer-ortools [#87](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/87)
```

- Uniformize wrappers output accordingly to API documentation [#83](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/83)

### Deprecated

> - Positions are no longer relations and must defined at activity level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Positions are no longer relations and must be defined at activity level
```

# Changelog

## [Unreleased]

## [v0.1.5] - 2021-01-05

### Added

- Allow support for semicolumn and tabulation in CSV files
- Collect current distance from OR-Tools

> - Allow initial routes when clustering methods are required

Reviewer 2: we don't have this yet :thinking:

Author: This is allowed, it didn't ensure that missions of a single route are within the same cluster :/

Reviewer 2: We still don't ensure that missions of a single route are within the same cluster in general. For example clustering based methods split_solve and dicho fail when there is initial_routes (optim-insert or other).

I suspect that you mean "partitions" (`[:preprocessing][:partitions]`), no?

Author: Yes, I should remove the ambiguity. And add a comment to mention, that even if it is allowed, we currently cannot ensure that members of a single route are within the same cluster.

- Position field for activities
- Sheduling and initial routes are now compatible
- Unfeasible missions are removed from routes [#31](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/31)
- Log reasons of unfeasible missions [#35](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/35)
- Read and log OR-Tools version
- Route costs [#46](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/46)
- Log of matrix computation [#52](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/52)

> - Allow multidepot within clustering [#56](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/56)

Reviewer 2: We should mention that this is a preliminary version and not production-ready and for testing and it will continue to evolve

Author: I'll add a WIP mention

- Introduce direct shipments, pickup and delivery must be consecutive [#51](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/51)
- Return total_time and total_travel_distance from scheduling heuristic [#63](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/63)

> - Return original ids for missions and vehicles [#73](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/73)

Reviewer: Only in JSON format

Author: CSV format is really specific. I assume that not mentioning it suppose that it is not impacted

- Reduce clustering default restarts from 50 to 10 [#49](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/49)
- Replace balanced_kmeans by balanced_vrp_clustering gem [#49](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/49)
- Factorize get operation status codes [#52](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/52)
- VROOM is no more refused due to initial routes [#59](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/59)
- Improved kill of jobs within scheduling heuristic [#57](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/57)
- CSV is now only returned for completed jobs [#60](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/60)
- Update fronts accordingly to CSV edits [#61](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/61)
- Ensure matrix, matrix_id and matrix_index consistency [#62](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/62)
- Dump filtered problems [#62](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/62)
- Default multi_trips value is 1 [#47](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/47)
- Bump VROOM to v1.5.0 [#66](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/66)

> - Reduce memory usage within scheduling heuristic [#71](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/71)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reduce memory usage within scheduling [#71](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/71)
```

- Reduce OR-Tools computation time within scheduling heuristic [#78](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/78)
- Route referents [#89](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/89)
- Bump Ruby to 2.5.5 [#97](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/97)
- Delegate quantity rounding to optimizer-ortools [#98](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/98)
- Improve Force start & breaks through optimizer-ortools [#98](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/98)

### Removed

> - solver_parameter from the model

Reviewer: Replaced by configuration[:resolution][:solver]

# Changelog

## [Unreleased]

## [v0.1.5] - 2021-01-05

### Added

- Allow support for semicolumn and tabulation in CSV files

> - Collect current distance from OR-Tools

Reviewer 3: If the feature was existing in previous version, this line should be in "Changed" section

> - Allow initial routes when partitions are required. Note that, this feature is available for preprocessing/partitions but is under development for split based algorithms (`split_solve` and `dichotomous`)

Reviewer 3: I think this line should be "[WIP]"

Author: The first part is not WIP, the mention for split based algorithms is only present to avoid misinterpretation

- Position field for activities
- Sheduling and initial routes are now compatible
- Unfeasible missions are removed from routes [#31](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/31)
- Log reasons of unfeasible missions [#35](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/35)

> - Read and log OR-Tools version

Reviewer 3: I agree, no need to add it

- Route costs [#46](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/46)

> - Log of matrix computation [#52](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/52)

Reviewer 3: No need to specify logging

> - [WIP] Allow multidepot within clustering [#56](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/56)

Reviewer 3: Since it is [WIP] I would add limitations if it's simple to explain

Author: @senhalil Could you provide some details on the current limitations ?

Reviewer 2: At the moment, the depot locations only influence the initialization of the clusters and the clusters can convergence to regions away from their depots under certain conditions (density of the points, distribution of the depots).

- Introduce direct shipments, pickup and delivery must be consecutive [#51](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/51)

> - Return `total_time` and `total_travel_distance` from scheduling heuristic [#63](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/63)

Reviewer 3: I think it's a fix

- Return original ids for missions and vehicles [#73](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/73)
- Return `total_waiting_time` [#83](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/83)

> - Introduce `minimize_days_worked` parameter for scheduling heuristic [#89](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/89)

Reviewer 3: Reword : - Change default behavior of scheduling heuristic to balance planned services over the entire period and introduce `minimize_days_worked` parameter for previous behavior

- Detect unconsistent `same_point_day` definition [#76](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/76)

### Changed

- Cache is now part of wrappers hash

> - Update tests

Reviewer 3: No need to specify

- Factorize get operation status codes [#52](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/52)
- VROOM is no more refused due to initial routes [#59](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/59)
- Improved kill of jobs within scheduling heuristic [#57](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/57)
- CSV is now only returned for completed jobs [#60](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/60)
- Update fronts accordingly to CSV edits [#61](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/61)
- Ensure matrix, matrix_id and matrix_index consistency [#62](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/62)
- Dump filtered problems [#62](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/62)
- Default `multi_trips` value is now 1 [#47](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/47)
- Bump VROOM to v1.5.0 [#66](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/66)
- Reduce memory usage for scheduling problems [#71](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/71)
- Reduce OR-Tools computation time within scheduling heuristic [#78](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/78)

> - Route referents [#89](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/89)

Reviewer: I agree : we can say something like 'Work on route referents definition within scheduling heuristic, in order to improve routes initialization'

- Bump Ruby to 2.5.5 [#97](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/97)

> - Delegate quantity rounding to optimizer-ortools [#98](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/98)

Author: As it moves the feature to another project and fix an issue, it seems quite important to notify users as it may imply some change in the behavior.

> - Delegate quantity rounding to optimizer-ortools [#98](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/98)

Reviewer 2: The error didn't exist in the previous release, it got introduced with route costs I believe. But it doesn't matter, do it as you see fit.

- Improve Force start & breaks through optimizer-ortools [#98](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/98)

### Removed

- `solver_parameter` from the model, it now fulfills `solver` and `preprocessing_first_solution_strategy` parameters

> - OR-Tools logs within sheduling heuristic [#28](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/28)

Reviewer 3: No need

> - Relation id [#31](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/31)

Reviewer 3: detail or remove

### Fixed

- Resolution time when using split_independent or max_split procedures
- Alternative activities with empties and fills
- Unreachable points detection
- Shift computation for sheduling problems
- Sheduling heuristic now rejects shipments and rests [#28](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/28)
- Reject empty problems [#35](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/35)
- Negative time limits [#35](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/35)
- Expand multi_trips only once [#36](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/36)
- Remove data from already started jobs [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)
- Clean interrupted working jobs at startup [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)
- Error when delete operation is invoked immedialty after get [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)
- Coerce `first_solution_strategy` into array [#38](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/38)
- Avoid unecessary route generation [#46](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/46)
- Correclty handle consecutive delete operations [#52](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/52)

> - Solution returned from cache [#53](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/53)

Reviewer 2: The bug this PR fixes has been introduced after master -- i.e., from the point of view of releases this bug never existed. 

Which reminds me that other items might have this problem but since our releases take too long, it is hard to keep track at the moment. 

At least this item, if I am not mistaken, doesn't need mentioning.

Reviewer 3: Ok with halil if release has a commit with ON and another woth OFF

- Returned http error codes [#62](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/62)

> - Check distance method to separate time and distance logics [#65](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/65)

Reviewer 2: This is related to unfeasible service detection improvements and either the PR number can be given there or this item can be removed I think.

Author: The PR reference has been moved with unfeasible service detection

- Split by skills was generating unexpected sub-problems [#47](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/47)
- Remove duplicated empty routes for the same vehicle [#50](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/50)
- Infinite loop due to impossible split within `dichotomous` [#67](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/67)
- Avoid depot duplication [#72](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/72)
- Wrong number of visits [#86](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/86)
- Protobuf needs binarymode [#87](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/87)
- Rewind protobuf output before decode [#87](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/87)
- Parse the last solution provided by optimizer-ortools only once [#87](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/87)
- Uniformize wrappers output accordingly to API documentation [#83](https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/83)

> ### Deprecated

Reviewer 3: Why not "Removed" ?

Author: The items are still linked to the features, but we encourage users to change the way they model their problem

- Allow support for semicolumn and tabulation in CSV files
- Collect current distance from OR-Tools

> - Allow initial routes when partitions are required. Note that, it currently cannot ensure that all missions of a route will be assigned to the same route.

Reviewer: I do not understand this. How can we consider routes for clustering and then ignore them ? Isn't it only for dicho (I guess) that it is not available yet ?

Reviewer 2: The earlier discussion is deleted by pushes https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/pull/99#discussion_r551867170

@braktar  I agree @fonsecadeline that we can improve the message.

We can say it is available for preprocessing/partitions and under development for split based algorithms (split_solve and dichotomous)...

Author: @fonsecadeline You have to tell me what can I say, as you're the one which have worked on it https://github.com/Mapotempo/optimizer-api/commit/648f73e93068045d113b3f5793a337ff58e9b013

Reviewer: You can say what @senhalil said :)
